# 10 Reasons to Start a Tenant Association

## May 12, 2024

**_1. STRENGTH IN NUMBERS_**

**A landlord's power over tenants comes from tenants feeling alone and
afraid.** It is difficult to demand your rights when you feel alone. The
first reason for forming an association is that doing so will help to
**counter the fear** that comes from feeling like the landlord has all
the power. When you are in an association, you are surrounded by other
people in the same position who can provide you with support. It is
easier to feel empowered when you are fighting alongside others.

**_2. MEET YOUR NEIGHBORS_**

Forming a tenants association helps to strengthen the community in your
apartment building. A tenants association is a way to **meet people
united by the same cause.** The connections that you make could lead to
new and empowering friendships and relationships. Even in buildings
where there is a history of conflict between neighbors, defending
yourselves against an abusive landlord or protecting your housing
against displacement can be a powerful way to heal and come together.

**_3. STRENGTHEN YOUR COMMUNITY_**

Forming a tenants association demonstrates that **a community is
stronger when it is united**. Having an association in your building
will help you to protect the identity and spirit of a community that is
threatened by gentrification. The more people in the neighborhood that
are united in associations and members of the Ann Arbor Tenants Union,
the more people can lean on each other in the fight for tenants' rights.

**_4. COLLECTIVE BARGAINING_**

As an association member, **you may find it easier to bargain with a
landlord**. "Collective bargaining" is when a group of people joins
together in order to increase their negotiating power. One hundred
tenants advocating for lower rent, necessary repairs, or against
harassment will have far more power than one tenant advocating for the
same thing. Demands coming from a tenants association are much more
likely to be granted than people acting by themselves. So, the easiest
way to get your landlord to do what you want would be to form a tenants
association.

**_5. PUBLIC PRESSURE_**

An association has a greater ability to put **public pressure** on
officials and landlords. One person conducting a rent strike to protest
unfair treatment by the landlord probably will not attract the attention
of public officials. And one tenant protesting may make that person
vulnerable to retaliation from the landlord. However, ten or even two
hundred households conducting a protest rent strike will get the
attention of the local government and the press. Local officials keep
public pressure in mind when making decisions for the community.

**_6. EASIER TO RETAIN LEGAL COUNSEL_**

When you are connected with a tenants association, **you have greater
access to legal resources.** Lawyers who specialize in tenant cases are
easier to contact through an association representative. Lawyers are
more likely to take a case when they know that they are also forming a
valuable relationship with a tenants association, as opposed to with an
individual. Often lawyers are more willing to take on a case if they
know they have the support of a group of united tenants.

**_7. EASIER AND QUICKER TO PLAN AN EFFECTIVE LEGAL STRATEGY_**

From a lawyer's perspective, **working with a tenants association makes
planning a case much easier.** Witnesses, documents, and other evidence
might apply to more than one case in the same building. Your lawyer can
often prepare the cases for all the association members together, which
makes planning more efficient. Other people from the association who are
members of the Ann Arbor Tenants Union can also provide support, and it
is easy for your legal counsel to contact them when planning a case.

**_8. ATTORNEY CLIENT PRIVILEGE_**

Michigan Compiled Laws ยง 767.5a(2) and Federal Rule of Evidence 502
protect specific legal communications between you, your lawyer, and your
agents. When preparing your case, communications between you, your
lawyer, and Ann Arbor Tenants Union representatives may be protected
under these laws. This means that you may be able to **communicate more
freely with other association members,** Ann Arbor Tenants Union
representatives, and your attorney when developing your legal strategy
if you engage in a joint representation agreement with other association
members and organizers.

**_9. PROTECTION FROM RETALIATION_**

According to Michigan Compiled Laws ยง 600.5720, **it is illegal for a
landlord to retaliate or threaten to retaliate against you** for joining
or participating in a tenants association. By joining a tenants
association, you have greater protections under Michigan law when you
exercise your rights and stand up for yourself. If a landlord does
retaliate against members of a tenants association by issuing a notice
to quit or by some other form of harassment, the tenants can choose to
sue for retaliation under Michigan Compiled Laws ยง 600.5720.

**_10. FREEDOM OF SPEECH, ASSEMBLY, AND THE RIGHT TO MAKE PUBLIC DEMANDS
COLLECTIVELY_**

The First Amendment of the United States Constitution protects everyone
engaging in the freedom of speech or assembly, including a wide variety
of union activities and even public protest. When you join a tenants
association, **the United States Constitution protects your right to
free speech and your right to association** (with limits). Article 19 of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights also guarantees rights to
people who express their opinions through a tenant's association,
although generally courts in the United States do not enforce this part
of international law.
